[proposal] add resource policy plugin (#594)
kubernetes-sigs/scheduler-plugins: kep/594-resourcepolicy/README.md

- Use Cases
- Known limitations
- Test plans
- Graduation criteria
- Production Readiness Review Questionnaire
   - Feature enablement and rollback
- Implementation history

## Summary
This proposal introduces a plugin to allow users to specify the priority of different resources and max resource consumption for workload on differnet resources.

## Motivation
The machines in a Kubernetes cluster are typically heterogeneous, with varying CPU, memory, GPU, and pricing. To efficiently utilize the different resources available in the cluster, users can set priorities for machines of different types and configure resource allocations for different workloads. Additionally, they may choose to delete pods running on low priority nodes instead of high priority ones. 

### Use Cases

1. As a user of cloud services, there are some stable but expensive ECS instances and some unstable but cheaper Spot instances in my cluster. I hope that my workload can be deployed first on stable ECS instances, and during business peak periods, the Pods that are scaled out are deployed on Spot instances. At the end of the business peak, the Pods on Spot instances are prioritized to be scaled in.

### Goals

> 1. Delvelop a filter plugin to restrict the resource consumption on each unit for different workloads.

Reviewer: typo: develop

If all units have the same priority, resourcepolicy will only limit the max pod on these units.

`Strategy` indicate how we treat the nodes doesn't match any unit. 
If strategy is `required`, the pod can only be scheduled on nodes that match the units in resource policy. 
If strategy is `prefer`, the pod can be scheduled on all nodes, these nodes not match the units will be 
considered after all nodes match the units. So if the strategy is `required`, we will return `unschedulable` 
for those nodes not match the units.

### Implementation Details

#### Scheduler Plugins

For each unit, we will record which pods were scheduled on it to prevent too many pods scheduled on it.

##### PreFilter
PreFilter check if the current pods match only one resource policy. If not, PreFilter will reject the pod.
If yes, PreFilter will get the number of pods on each unit to determine which units are available for the pod
and write this information into cycleState.

##### Filter
Filter check if the node belongs to an available unit. If the node doesn't belong to any unit, we will return
success if the strategy is `prefer`, otherwise we will return unschedulable.

##### Score

> If `priority` and `weight` is set in resource policy, we will schedule pod based on `priority` first. For units with the same `priority`, we will spread pods based on `weight`.

Reviewer: this may be a silly question, but hey.
So it seems to me that the actual scoring criteria is based on the tuple (priority, weight). Is there any reason to use two values instead of just one single value?
IOW, would it work if we use just `proiority`? What are the pros and cons of using 2 values here?

Author: I realized that this is a modification that I missed when removing weight earlier. I have already updated the kep

# Resource Policy

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Use Cases](#use-cases)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [CRD API](#crd-api)
  - [Implementation Details](#implementation-details)
    - [Scheduler Plugins](#scheduler-plugins)
      - [PreFilter](#prefilter)
      - [Filter](#filter)
      - [Score](#score)
    - [Resource Policy Controller](#resource-policy-controller)
- [Known limitations](#known-limitations)
- [Test plans](#test-plans)
- [Graduation criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Feature enablement and rollback](#feature-enablement-and-rollback)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

> This proposal introduces a plugin to allow users to specify the priority of different resources and max resource 
> consumption for workload on differnet resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces a plugin that enables users to set priorities for various resources and define maximum resource consumption limits for workloads across different resources.
```

## Motivation
The machines in a Kubernetes cluster are typically heterogeneous, with varying CPU, memory, GPU, and pricing. To 
efficiently utilize the different resources available in the cluster, users can set priorities for machines of different 
types and configure resource allocations for different workloads. Additionally, they may choose to delete pods running 
on low priority nodes instead of high priority ones. 

### Use Cases

1. As a user of cloud services, there are some stable but expensive ECS instances and some unstable but cheaper Spot 
instances in my cluster. I hope that my workload can be deployed first on stable ECS instances, and during business peak 
periods, the Pods that are scaled out are deployed on Spot instances. At the end of the business peak, the Pods on Spot 
instances are prioritized to be scaled in.

### Goals

> 1. Develop a filter plugin to restrict the resource consumption on each unit for different workloads.

Reviewer 2: could you elaborate on "unit"? do you mean one kind of resource?

2. Develop a score plugin to favor nodes matched by a high priority unit.
3. Automatically setting deletion costs on Pods to control the scaling in sequence of workloads through a controller.

### Non-Goals

1. Modify the workload controller to support deletion costs. If the workload don't support deletion costs, scaling in 
sequence will be random.

> 2. When creating a ResourcePolicy, if the number of Pods has already violated the quantity constraint of the 

Reviewer 2: could you reword this to be more readable? basically, just use a positive tone to describe it as a goal that is out of scope of this KEP.

ResourcePolicy, we will not attempt to delete the excess Pods.

## Proposal

### CRD API
```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.sigs.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: ResourcePolicy
metadata:
  name: xxx
  namespace: xxx
spec:
  matchLabelKeys:
    - pod-template-hash
  matchPolicy:
    ignoreTerminatingPod: true
    ignorePreviousPod: false
  forceMaxNum: false
  podSelector:
    matchExpressions:
      - key: key1
        operator: In
        values:
        - value1
    matchLabels:
      key1: value1
  strategy: prefer
  units:
  - name: unit1
    priority: 5
    maxCount: 10
    nodeSelector:
      matchExpressions:
      - key: key1
        operator: In
        values:
        - value1
  - name: unit2
    priority: 5
    maxCount: 10
    nodeSelector:
      matchExpressions:
      - key: key1
        operator: In
        values:
        - value2
  - name: unit3
    priority: 4
    maxCount: 20
    nodeSelector:
      matchLabels:
        key1: value3
```

> `Priority` define the priority of each unit. Pods will be scheduled on units with a higher priority. 

Reviewer 2: is `Prirority` is under `units[*]`? if so, it'd read better to use a bullet to explain it under a top-level `units` API field.

Reviewer 2: I think we missed a detailed explanation for `units`.

Author: Updated the kep. Thanks

If all units have the same priority, resourcepolicy will only limit the max pod on these units.

`Strategy` indicate how we treat the nodes doesn't match any unit. 

> If strategy is `required`, the pod can only be scheduled on nodes that match the units in resource policy. 

Reviewer 2: In a multi-tenant cluster, given ResourcePolicy is a namespace-scoped CR, but nodes/node pools might be shared across tenants. Does it mean that if a tenant set a high-priority policy with strategy `required`, it could make other tenants who don't set or set low-priority policy get less chances to get their workloads scheduled?

If strategy is `prefer`, the pod can be scheduled on all nodes, these nodes not match the units will be 
considered after all nodes match the units. So if the strategy is `required`, we will return `unschedulable` 
for those nodes not match the units.

`MatchLabelKeys` indicate how we group the pods matched by `podSelector` and `matchPolicy`, its behavior is like 
`MatchLabelKeys` in `PodTopologySpread`.

`matchPolicy` indicate if we should ignore some kind pods when calculate pods in certain unit.

> If `forceMaxNum` is set `true`, we will not try the next units when one unit is not full, this property have no effect

Reviewer 2: Could you reword this sentence a bit?

Author: Rewrote this sentence. Pods will be matched by the ResourcePolicy in same namespace when the `.spec.podSelector`. And if `.spec.matchPolicy.ignoreTerminatingPod` is `true`, pods with Non-Zero `.spec.deletionTimestamp` will be ignored.

when `max` is not set in units.

### Implementation Details

#### Scheduler Plugins

For each unit, we will record which pods were scheduled on it to prevent too many pods scheduled on it.

> ##### PreFilter

Reviewer 2: Let’s avoid using `#####` for paragraph indentation. The maximum indentation level should be `####` in most cases.

Author: Ok, no problem.
